Proposal: Service Context (#85)
swift-server/sswg: proposals/NNNN-service-context.md

# Swift Service Context

* Proposal: [SSWG-NNNN](NNNN-service-context.md)
* Authors: [Konrad 'ktoso' Malawski](https://github.com/ktoso) / [Moritz Lang](https://github.com/slashmo)
* Review Manager: TBD
* Status: **Implemented**
* Implementation: 
  * [swift-service-context](https://github.com/apple/swift-service-context)
* Forum Threads: TBD

## Package Description

ServiceContext is a minimal (zero-dependency) context propagation container, intended to "carry" items for purposes of cross-cutting tools to be built on top of it.

> It is modeled after the concepts explained in W3C Baggage and the in the spirit of Tracing Plane's "Baggage Context" type, although by itself it does not define a specific serialization format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is modeled after the concepts explained in W3C Baggage and in the spirit of Tracing Plane's "Baggage Context" type, although by itself, it does not define a specific serialization format.
```

> See https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing for actual instrument types and implementations which can be used to deploy various cross-cutting instruments all reusing the same baggage type. More information can be found in the SSWG meeting notes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing for actual instrument types and implementations, which can be used to deploy various cross-cutting instruments, all reusing the same service context type. More information can be found in the SSWG meeting notes.
```

> See https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing for actual instrument types and implementations, which can be used to deploy various cross-cutting instruments, all reusing the same service context type. More information can be found in the SSWG meeting notes.

Reviewer 2: `More information can be found in the SSWG meeting notes` seems a little harsh expecting people to search through all the notes for mention of service context, or baggage

Author: Yeah let me update that to point to concrete docs

Author: I added 

> Refer to distributed tracing [documentation](https://swiftpackageindex.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing/main/documentation/tracing) to learn more about how it is used in practice.

| | |
|--|--|
| **Package Name** | `swift-service-context` |
| **Module Name** | `ServiceContextModule` |
| **Proposed Maturity Level** | [Incubating](https://github.com/swift-server/sswg/blob/main/process/incubation.md#process-diagram) |
| **License** | [Apache v2](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing/blob/main/LICENSE.txt) |

> | **Dependencies** | [swift-service-context](https://github.com/apple/swift-service-context) |

Reviewer: 🔄😀
```suggestion
| **Dependencies** | - |
```

## Introduction

Service context is a type-safe dictionary that is keyed using types and intended to be used for contextual information propagation across asynchronous code.

It declares a well-known Task Local key for the service context, and patterns how to add keys. 

> It is a core building block of [swift-distributed-tracing](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing) which uses it to propagate trace information across swift concurrency tasks, though can be used independently as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is a core building block of [swift-distributed-tracing](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing) which uses it to propagate trace information across swift concurrency tasks, though it can be used independently as well.
```

```swift
var context = ServiceContext.current ?? ServiceContext.topLevel
```

Once obtained, one can set values in by using defined keys, like this:

```swift
private enum FirstTestKey: ServiceContextKey {
  typealias Value = Int
}

var context = ServiceContext.topLevel
context[FirstTestKey.self] = 42
```

Keys declared as types conforming to `ServiceContextKey` allow for future extension where we might want to configure specific keys using additional behavior, like for example defining the `static let nameOverride` of a key. It is also important that a Key type may be private to whomever declares it, allowing only such library to set these values. 

Service context is used primarily as a task-local value read and modified like this:

```swift
func exampleFunction() async -> Int {
  guard let context = ServiceContext.current {
    return 0
  }
  guard let value = context[FirstTestKey.self] {
    return 0
  }
  print("test = \(value)") // test = 42
  return value
}

// ----------------------------------------

var context = ServiceContext.topLevel
context[FirstTestKey.self] = 42

let c = ServiceContext.withValue(context) {
    await exampleFunction()
}

> assert(c == 42)

Reviewer 2: Seems like an odd example where you are returning the value to test it outside of the `withValue` function. Would it not be better to stick the assert inside the `withValue`.

Author: Ok sure, I'll rework a bit

```

Swift's [task local values](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/tasklocal) are used to automatically propagate the context value to any child tasks that may be created from this code, such that context is automatically propagated through to them, e.g. like this:

```swift
func testMeMore() {
  guard let context = ServiceContext.current {
    return 0
  }
  guard let value = context[FirstTestKey.self] {
    return 0
  }
  return value
}

func test() async -> Int {
  async let v = testMeMore() // read context from child task
  return await v
}

var context = ServiceContext.topLevel
context[FirstTestKey.self] = 42
ServiceContext.withValue(context) {
    assert(test() == 42)
}
```

For keys which are expected to be public API, used ty developers, it is recommended to follow this pattern to declare an accessor on the context, rather than exposing the Key type directly:

```swift

> extension ServiceContext { 

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we recommend the nice pattern for this

```
extension ServiceContext {
    private enum TestKey: ServiceContextKey {
        typealias Value = Int
    }
    public var testValue: String? {
         set { 
              self[TestKey.self] = newValue
         }
          get {
              self[TestKey.self]
         }
}
```

That way, there's one way to access and we don't leak the somewhat unituitive type.

Author: That is what this is trying to show, yeah. Agreed that the snippet should include the type, will fix

Author: I polished this all up a bit so we're strictly recommending that pattern

>   public testValue: String? {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  public var testValue: String? {
```

  * SSWG should have access / authorization to graduated repositories in case of emergency: **Satisfied (Konrad, Franz, Tomer)**
  * Adopt the [SSWG Security Best Practices](../security/README.md)): **Pending**
* Testing, CI and Release
  * Have unit tests for Linux: **Satisfied**
  * CI setup, including testing PRs and the main branch: **Satisfied**
  * Follow semantic versioning, with at least one published pre-release (e.g. 0.1.0, 1.0.0-beta.1) or release (e.g. 1.0.0): **Satisfied**
* Licensing
  * Apache 2, MIT, or BSD (Apache 2 recommended): **Satisfied: Apache 2**
* Conventions and Style
  * Adopt [Swift API Design Guidelines](https://swift.org/documentation/api-design-guidelines/): **Satisfied**
  * Follow [SSWG Technical Best Practices](#technical-best-practices) when applicable: **Satisfied**
  * Prefer to adopt code formatting tools and integrate them into the CI: **Satisfied**
Incubating Requirements:
* Document that it is being used successfully in production by at least two independent end users which, in the SSWG judgment, are of adequate quality and scope.

>   * **We are aware of 3+ production use-cases in large deployments, using [swift-otel](https://github.com/slashmo/swift-otel) as a backend.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * **We are aware of 3+ production use-cases in large deployments using [swift-distributed-tracing](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing).**
```

# Swift Service Context

* Proposal: [SSWG-NNNN](NNNN-service-context.md)
* Authors: [Konrad 'ktoso' Malawski](https://github.com/ktoso) / [Moritz Lang](https://github.com/slashmo)

> * Review Manager: ???
> * Status: **Implemented**
> * Implementation: 
>   * [swift-service-context](https://github.com/apple/swift-service-context)
> * Forum Threads:
>   * TODO

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Review Manager: TBD
* Status: **Implemented**
* Implementation: [apple/swift-service-context](https://github.com/apple/swift-service-context)
* Forum Threads: TBD
```

## Package Description

ServiceContext is a minimal (zero-dependency) context propagation container, intended to "carry" items for purposes of cross-cutting tools to be built on top of it.

It is modeled after the concepts explained in W3C Baggage and the in the spirit of Tracing Plane's "Baggage Context" type, although by itself it does not define a specific serialization format.

See https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing for actual instrument types and implementations which can be used to deploy various cross-cutting instruments all reusing the same baggage type. More information can be found in the SSWG meeting notes.

> | | |
> 
> |--|--|
> 
> | **Package Name** | `swift-service-context` |
> 
> | **Module Name** | `ServiceContextModule` |
> 
> | **Proposed Maturity Level** | [Incubating](https://github.com/swift-server/sswg/blob/main/process/incubation.md#process-diagram) |
> 
> | **License** | [Apache v2](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing/blob/main/LICENSE.txt) |
> 
> | **Dependencies** | [swift-service-context](https://github.com/apple/swift-service-context) |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| | |
|--|--|
| **Package Name** | `swift-service-context` |
| **Module Name** | `ServiceContextModule` |
| **Proposed Maturity Level** | [Incubating](https://github.com/swift-server/sswg/blob/main/process/incubation.md#process-diagram) |
| **License** | [Apache v2](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing/blob/main/LICENSE.txt) |
| **Dependencies** | [swift-service-context](https://github.com/apple/swift-service-context) |
```

Author: Thanks!
